---
title: "[Lecture Summary] 03 Algorithm and Data Structure : Sorting"
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
toc_lable: "Main Contents"
use_math: true
categories:
  - Algorithm
tags:
  - [Algorithm, DataStructure]
---

This contents is based on Lecture of [link](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/6-006-introduction-to-algorithms-spring-2020/pages/syllabus/)

# Overview

## Notation

- Permutation: array with same elements in a different order
- Sorting: $B[i-1] \le B[i]$

Type
- destructive sort = overwrites the original array
- inplace = destructive + do not use extra memory(uses $O(1)$ extra space!)

## I/O
- Input : (Static) array $A$ of size $n$
- Output : (Static) sorted array $B$ being sorted permutation of A

# Permutation Sort(POOR)

It tries every case and check it! (Brute Force)<br>
Then, there are 2 steps: (1) enumerating cases and (2) check sorting.

Therefore, Running time takes about $\Omega(n!\cdot n)$
- $n!$ comes from enumerating permutation of size $n$ array
- $n$ comes from analyizing whether it is sorted or not.

# Selection Sort

Find the largest element with index and swap it!(We can think of ascending order and start from the last index.) <br>
Then, there are 2 steps: (1) "prefix_max" for find the index of largest element (2) "selection_sort" for sorting process

## Prefix_max 

- Base case : takes $\theta(1)$ 
- Recursive equation : $S(n) = S(n-1) + \theta(1)$
- Substitution : $S(n) = \theta(n)$
- Recurrence Tree: chain of $n$ nodes & $\theta(1)$ for each node(Every node takes constant time just for comparison!)
  - $\sum 1 = \theta(n)$

## selection subset

- Base case : takes $\theta(1)$
- Recursive equation : $T(n) = T(n-1) + \theta(n)$
- Substitution : $T(n) = \theta(n^2)$
- Recurrence Tree: chain of $n$ nodes & $\theta(i)$ for each node(Every node takes time proportional to index because it contains prefix_max process which takes linear time complexity!)
  - $\sum i = \theta(n^2)$

# Insert Sort

reverse version of selection sort!

# Merge Sort

Recursively sorting half of the subset and merge a pair of subset!<br>
Then there are 2 steps: (1) sort it and (2) merge it.

## merge

- Base case: takes $\theta(1)$
- Recursive equation $S(n) = S(n-1) + \theta(1)$
- Substitution : $S(n) = \theta(n)$

## merge subset

- Base case: takes $\theta(1)$
- Recursive equation $T(n) = 2T(n/2) + \theta(n)$
  - The second term on the right hand side : caused by running function merge!
    - What is repeatedly called function is function merge!
  - The first term on the right hand side : caused by 2 (sub) arrays
- Substitution : $T(n) = \theta(n\log(n))$
  - Satisfies equation!
- Recurrence Tree: Think of running for the whole elements of array. We can see it as a binary tree with depth of $\log_2(n)$ and $n$ leaves. For level $i$, there are $2^i$ nodes and every node takes $O(n/2^i)$.
  - $\sum_i (2^i)(n/2^i) = \sum_i n = \theta(n\log_2(n))$
