---
title: "[Lecture Summary] 10 Algorithm and Data Structure : BFS & DFS"
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
toc_lable: "Main Contents"
use_math: true
categories:
  - Algorithm
tags:
  - [Algorithm, DataStructure]
---

This contents is based on Lecture of [link](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/6-006-introduction-to-algorithms-spring-2020/pages/syllabus/)

# Breadth-First Search

## Overview

Compute level sets which a set of "iso-distant" vertices from source vertex. For unreachable vertex, distance is infinity. This requires Single Source Shortest Paths! It search for whole verices.

Moreover, we can generalize weight restriction into non-negative weights via expanding graph. We can interprete edge with weight n as a series of vertices with unweighted edge. 

## Algorithm

- Base case

$L_0$ = {$s$}, $P(s)=None$

- Iteration

> 
  $i \gets 1$<br>
  while $L_{i-1} \ne $ {},<br>
    $\forall u \in L_{i-1}, \forall v\in Adj(u)\backslash \cup_j L_j$<br>
    $add $v$ to $L_i$<br>
    $ \delta(s,v) = i$<Br>
    $ P(v)=u$<br>
    $ i++$

## Time analysis

- Time to access via edges and update parent : $O(\mid E \mid)$
- Time to access unreachable vertices and allocate distance as infinity : $O(\mid V \mid)$

As a result, it takes linear in input size!


# Depth-First Search


## Overview

Return path should not be the shortest path. But it does not revisit a vertex

## Algorithm

$P(s)=None$ and then visit($s$)

def visit(parent $u$):
  - for each $v \in Adj(u)$ and $parent(v)$ is None
    - parent(v) $\gets u$ 
    - visit($v$)

## Correctness

DFS visit every vertices which is reachable from source $s$.

## Time analysis

It requires only $O(\mid E \mid)$! No need to access every vertices. Only consider reachable verices.


## Full search

repeat BFS or DFS util every vertex is visited! For Full-DFS, runing time is $O(\mid E \mid + \mid V \mid)$ because it visits every vertices.